

<!-- message to students, 2024 -->

Dear Students,

## Welcome

Welcome to Transport Data Science. In this module you will learn data
science skills and how to apply them to solve real world problems, with
a focus on transport planning. Transport is by definition a geographic
phenomenon, meaning the movement from one place to another: “the purpose
of transportation is to overcome space” (Rodrigue, Comtois, and Slack
2013).

Becoming good at transport data science therefore means becoming good at
data science in general and geographic data science in particular
(Lovelace, Nowosad, and Muenchow 2019). 2024 is an exciting time to be
learning data science for transport applications. A wide range of new
and open source tools, combined with unprecedented amounts of new data,
enable researchers to visualise/model/understand transport systems in
more breadth and depth than ever before.

## About the course

Based on an understanding of the evolving nature of data science as a
collaborative and open source code-driven enterprise, this module takes
a ‘learning by doing’ approach, with the content delivered as

- 6 \* 3 hour practicals
- 2 \* 1 hour seminars, followed by practical sessions
- feedback on your work

See the module timetable at
https://mytimetable.leeds.ac.uk/link?timetable.id=202324!module!D5179CB14D503D52757F4BE89B1C998B
and in the table here:
https://github.com/ITSLeeds/TDS#tds-transport-data-science

You will need to work hard to become a proficient data scientist in the
transport domain. The work will provide you with the foundation you need
to progress.

## Homework

You need to do three things before the first session on Thursday 8th
February at 09:00:

### 1. Install and test the software

The course is taught with R and RStudio so you need to have these
installed on your computer before the first practical session. Follow
the instructions in the book Reproducible Road Safety Research with R,
which you can find here:
https://itsleeds.github.io/rrsrr/introduction.html#installing-r-and-rstudio

If you learn better by watching videos, you can watch this video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v =YrEe2TLr3MI

#### Can I use University of Leeds computers?

The University of Leeds has RStudio on computers installed. However, we
strongly recommend that you install R and RStudio on your own computer
so that you can work on the course material outside of the practical
sessions. The RStudio installations on University of Leeds computers
have not recently been tested and in the past have caused problems for
students.

#### Can I use a different IDE?

You can use a different IDE (Integrated Development Environment) to
RStudio if you prefer (VS Code is the only other IDE I would recommend),
but you will need to be able to install R packages and run R scripts. If
you use VS Code, you will need to install the R extension for VS Code:
https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?i temName=Ikuyadeu.r I
recommend taking a read of this guide if you want to try out VS Code for
data science: https://github.com/RamiKrispin/vscode-r You can also use
Python, but you will need to be able to install Python packages and run
Python scripts. We strongly recommend using Quarto with VS Code for R,
Python and other languages, see here for more details:
https://quarto.org/docs/tools/vscode.html

### 2. Read and try to complete the exercises in Chapters 1 to 4 of the book Reproducible Road Safety Research with R

The second thing you should do is ensure that you have the necessary
software installed on your computer and that you have tested that you
can use it for the datasets we will be using in the course. **You must
read and try to complete the exercises in Chapters 1 to 4 of the book
Reproducible Road Safety Research with R.** Most important section of
those 4 chapters is Section 1.5, which explains how to install R and
RStudio. This is not a theoretical section: I suggest you follow the
instructions here ASAP:
https://itsleeds.github.io/rrsrr/introduction.html#installing-r-and-rstudio

Other key chapters in that resources are:

- Chapter 2 on the basics of the statistical programming language R:
  https://itsleeds.github.io/rrsrr/basics.html
- Chapter 3 on using RStudio:
  https://itsleeds.github.io/rrsrr/rstudio.html
- Chapter 4 on installing R packages, **make sure you can install
  packages such as sf**: https://itsleeds.github.io/rrsrr/pkgs.html

### 3. Get set-up on GitHub and Microsoft Teams

Teams and GitHub will be the main platforms we use for communication and
collaboration. Ensure you can access them as soon as possible.

- Sign-up to get a GitHub account here: https://github.com/
- Ensure you can access the Transport Data Science Team on Microsoft
  Teams and please do say hello via this link:
  https://teams.microsoft.com/l/channel/19%3a-IqQ19KOCzVzkbPWnQy8d4dUq0MspiN6Dv4BJYMr-ck1%40thread.tacv2/General?groupId=0e661005-2ad9-4aa2-a466-b3a1afa728c1&tenantId=bdeaeda8-c81d-45ce-863e-5232a535b7cb
- See the reading list associated with the module at
  https://github.com/ITSLeeds/TDS/blob/master/catalogue.md#reading-list.
- Ensure you can access the module page on Minerva:
  https://minerva.leeds.ac.uk/ultra/courses/\_551386_1/outline
- Answer the questionnaire on the Minerva module page (allow a few hours
  to do this because it asks you to complete some tasks while you answer
  the questions): **without completing this we cannot add you to the
  course on GitHub.**

## Contact

If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to contact me via
email. My office hours are 10:00 to 12:00 on Mondays.

I really look forward to working with you all to make this a successful
and enjoyable module.

## Questionnaire

Please complete the questionnaire on the Minerva module page: **without
completing this we cannot add you to the course on GitHub.** This
questionnaire assumes you have read and acted on the information in this
welcome message:
https://github.com/ITSLeeds/TDS/blob/master/messages/welcome.md

1.  Have you installed R and RStudio on your computer, following the
    instructions in the welcome message?

2.  Have you read and tried to complete the exercises in Chapters 1 to 4
    of the book Reproducible Road Safety Research with R?

3.  Have you signed up to GitHub?

4.  What is your GitHub username?

5.  Have you joined the Transport Data Science Team on Microsoft Teams?

6.  Have you got experience with R?

7.  Have you got experience with Python?

8.  Have you got experience with geographic data?

9.  What would you most like to get out of this course?

# References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
entry-spacing="0">

<div id="ref-lovelace_geocomputation_2019" class="csl-entry">

Lovelace, Robin, Jakub Nowosad, and Jannes Muenchow. 2019.
*Geocomputation with R*. CRC Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-rodrigue_geography_2013" class="csl-entry">

Rodrigue, Jean-Paul, Claude Comtois, and Brian Slack. 2013. *The
Geography of Transport Systems*. Third. London, New York: Routledge.

</div>

</div>
